Report #1: UNL Campus Observations

The main observable impact of the Coronavirus  on the UNL campus is the increased signage and the presence of visual cues in the campus space and buildings. The signs that have been erected around campus are not uniform but actually vary quite a bit in their design and content and are mostly related to the context in which they are placed. The signs are supplemented by visual cues such as arrows on the floor and physical barriers such as glass screens. These visual markers are placed so that it would be difficult to  ignore the different buzzwords: wear a mask, socially distance, do not enter if you are sick, etc. The varying content of the signs also reduces the potential for them to simply fade into the background. These visual signs work together to create an environment that must be navigated in relation to their linguistic content. Just as “language is shaped according to the contexts in which it is needed”(Hunter et. al), language also shapes the behavior of whoever encounters it, even if they choose to ignore or downplay the suggested behavior. The experience of these signs are “hermeneutic acts”(Staley) in that we do not just understand them in a literal sense but grapple with the moral responsibility they place upon us and the inconvenience it poses to our usual way of life. 

The other sign that is ubiquitous is the face mask, which creates a physical barrier on the level of the individual and signals to others that you have their well-being in mind. At the same time, it makes normal communication more difficult since information usually gleaned from body language is partially obscured. The face mask itself is a kind of “pre-linguistic or pre-discursive”(Staley) type of communication. On a symbolic level it obscures the identity of the person wearing it. Besides the health benefit, It could also be considered a “ritual” action since it is supposed to be worn in a specific way in specific contexts, and is intended to prevent the spread of disease and reduce fear and anxiety within the community.

Copyright Bryan Christman, CC by 4.0