Report #2: Comparing Tools for Text and Image

WordPress, Blogger, Flickr, and Omeka are all digital publishing platforms with unique interfaces and features which create different experiences for both the publisher and the user.  WordPress and Blogger emphasize written reflection as the primary content and include the capability to integrate other content types such as photos. Flickr and Omeka emphasize collecting and classifying digital objects, although Flickr focuses exclusively on photos while Omeka allows for a wide variety of different objects. These two different emphases allow for different types of projects but also have the potential to be integrated together. In this essay I will briefly explore the possibilities of these platforms and compare them along the lines of their features, ease of use, and integration capabilities. 

WordPress and Blogger are both versions of blog software which encourage written posts, sometimes with supplemental content. Blogger, with its minimal user interface and limited formatting options, sticks to the basics of the written post. It is intuitive and easy to use and allows you to zero in on the text without being distracted by too many customization options. WordPress, on the other hand, has a more cluttered interface with a large amount of customization and formatting options. The block system allows for many types of content besides basic text to be inputted. Some features I found promising were the ability to input tables, various image blocks, timelines, tag clouds, and an interactive map. It also provides integration with a number of third-party apps such as social media platforms and other content software including Flickr. The WordPress platform extends beyond basic blogging functionality and can be used to build professional-looking websites and portfolios.

Flickr and Omeka have little to no customization options and focus instead on particular photos or objects and their associated metadata. Flickr has the capability of extracting much of the metadata automatically from the picture itself, while the rest is intuitive to input. Omeka also provides a specific structure for the metadata, but it is much more open-ended, as you could potentially write anything into the different textboxes. This forces you to think more carefully about the metadata and how you wish to format it. Omeka also has an advantage over Flickr since it provides a large number of object types. If you were using photos only, Flickr’s built in features such as metadata extraction and the photo map give it an advantage over Omeka, whose metadata system is text-based only.

The best way to use and integrate these tools would depend on the project. For making observations, taking photos, and writing a series of reflections, I would probably choose Blogger and Flickr for their ease of use. However, if I were doing a less serialized project, I would choose WordPress over Blogger for the formatting options and the ability to create more of a website feel. If the project were more research-based, I would choose Omeka over Flickr for its metadata capabilities and support for many object types.

Copyright Bryan Christman, CC by 4.0