Report #4: Downtown Lincoln Observations

In this reflection, I will be discussing my experience in downtown Lincoln and contrasting it to my experience on the UNL campus. Downtown, I found that there were a number of observable changes related to the Coronavirus pandemic, but that I had to look somewhat more carefully to find them than I did while on the UNL campus. While the signage on campus formed a cohesive experience and seemed relevant to my own identity as a student, the signage downtown was much more scattered and variable, and seemed less relevant to me as an observer who wasn’t interacting with the various buildings and businesses.

In general, I found that simply walking around downtown, the experience was not much different than it has been in the past, besides a slight reduction in traffic and masks being worn by some pedestrians. For the most part, concerns about Coronavirus emerge when you are patronizing a business, which I did not do during my observations. However, a good number of businesses had some form of signage on their front door or window related to the Coronavirus. For example, the A Novel Idea bookstore had a large professional-looking sign announcing that they are open for curbside pickup and appointment only, while some bars had just a sheet of paper referring to the mask mandate. 

Other things I noticed were the lack of movie posters and movies playing at the Lincoln Grand,  and the fact that both Raising Cane’s and Jersey Mike’s on 14th St. were closed. I also noticed a few fliers referencing “the Return of Downtown Lincoln”, which I assumed were left over from the reopening period.

Altogether, the downtown Lincoln signage was much less “in your face” than the UNL campus signage, owing to the fact that it is up to the businesses to enforce mask usage and social distancing. On campus, the signage was targeted directly at students by using school colors, imagery, and mascots in order to link our identity as students to our responsibility to prevent the spread of the virus. This sense of identity seemed much less relevant in my time downtown, which allowed me to take a bit more of a detached look at my surroundings. I also found myself thinking more about documentation than last time, which was beneficial in planning for the next assignment but distracted me at times from reflecting on the immediate experience. 

Copyright Bryan Christman, CC by 4.0