Report #5: Comparing Tools for Spatial Narrative

In comparing StoryMap, GeoJSON, and pen and paper methods for creating spatial narratives, I found that each provided a different experience based on the degree of customizability built into the tool’s design.

I found that pen and paper, the method that was most customizable from the maker’s perspective, forced me to visualize my own memories of the space rather than relying heavily on the data and the documentation. I also found that the drawing process was the most enjoyable of the three, since it reminded me of hand-drawing fantasy maps as a kid. The pen and paper method seems best suited for generating narrative elements to integrate into the project. For example, the Gilded Age Plains City project discusses how “people ‘mark’ or ‘inscribe’ the space” of the city with meaning in their daily routines. The subjective aspects of my drawing communicate how I personally inscribe downtown Lincoln with meaning, since it shows which buildings and pathways are more relevant to my own narrative about the space and which are less relevant.

However, when considering the narrative from the viewer’s perspective, the less customizable option of StoryMap provides a more streamlined experience which highlights the data more prominently and exactly. It also allows for embedding images which gives the viewer a more concrete visual experience. Whereas the pen and paper method provides a subjective view of the space, both StoryMap and GeoJSON present a map that is considered “objective”, or is at least a publicly agreed upon version of how to represent the space of the city.

In comparing GeoJSON and StoryMap, GeoJSON presents more possibilities for both the maker and the viewer to interact with the map by including the capability to draw lines and shapes, place markers, and add colors. GeoJSON also provides access to the underlying code and metadata fields so that the maker has even more control over the project. Additionally, whereas StoryMap guides the viewer into a sequential narrative, GeoJSON allows the viewer to follow or disregard visual cues and move around the map as they see fit. Overall, I see GeoJSON as having the best combination of customizability and structure for the purposes of spatial narrative, although it is a little more difficult to work with than StoryMap. 

Copyright Bryan Christman, CC by 4.0