Report #7: History of the Lands of Lincoln and UNL

The following research into the history of the lands surrounding Lincoln and UNL contextualizes my understanding and representations of the city, the university, and the current pandemic, as they are limited by my own historical viewpoint. Acknowledging the history of Native Americans in the area and the effects of subsequent European settlement is essential to understanding how the area exists today.

Native Americans and the Lands of Lincoln, Nebraska and UNL

According to Andreas’ History of the State of Nebraska, Salt Creek in Lancaster county, Nebraska was once a boundary between the Pawnee territory on the west side and the Otoe territory on the east side. As a result, the area around Lincoln was said to be “the scene of many collisions between these hostile tribes prior to and during the early settlement”(Andreas 1882) of pioneers during the mid-nineteenth century. Andreas further recounts a number of altercations between Native Americans and the incoming settlers that contributed to rising tensions.

The previous source suggests that the local area was contested before, during, and after European settlement; however, it should be noted that this narrative was government-funded and includes no input from the Native Americans themselves. The following two paragraphs summarize encyclopedia entries written by David J. Wishart, a professor at UNL, and provide additional information about the Pawnee and Otoe tribes.

The Pawnee “have roots in central Nebraska extending back at least as far as the sixteenth century, and perhaps even further”(Wishart 2011b), and at one time supported a population of up to twenty thousand. In the nineteenth century, the Pawnee were decimated by disease and war, encroached on by the Lakota to the north and the Americans arriving from the east: “By 1854, when Nebraska Territory was opened to settlers, the Pawnees were a beleaguered people”(Wishart 2011b). They migrated south to Indian Territory during the 1870s.

The Otoe migrated to the Salt Creek area of Nebraska from the Great Lakes region during the eighteenth century and at one time sustained a population of over a thousand. Throughout the nineteenth century, “the outside world crowded in, and with the fur traders, missionaries, Indian agents, and settlers came disease and resource depletion”(Wishart 2011a), as well as the disastrous introduction of alcohol into their communities. They were forced to sell their land to the United States Government during the 1830s and eventually migrated to the Indian Territory as well during the 1870s. Despite the departure of these two major tribes, Native Americans continue to have a presence and a history in the area of Lincoln throughout the twentieth century and extending to the present.

Native American Activism in Lincoln and UNL

The American Indian Movement(AIM) rose to prominence after the Termination Act of 1953 and the Relocation Act of 1956, which caused many Native Americans to migrate from reservations into urban areas, where they faced discriminatory policies. AIM held a number of protests across the country to bring attention to the struggles of Native Americans and to demand restitution from the government. The organization received considerable coverage in the Daily Nebraskan student newspaper at UNL during the years 1969-1975. For example, the story included below reports on a protest at the Lincoln capitol in 1972, which was held in support of AIM’s occupation of the Bureau of Indian Affairs in Washington, DC. Taken together, these accounts provide a rough sketch of the role that Native Americans have played in the history of the local area of Lincoln.


Works Cited

Andreas, A.T. 1882. “History of the State of Nebraska.” Andreas’ History of the State of Nebraska. http://www.kancoll.org/books/andreas_ne/lancaster/lancaster-p1.html#indian (Links to an external site.).

Borgmann, Jake. 2019. “UNL’s AIM: A Brief History of the American Indian Movement And Its Influence on the University of Nebraska-Lincoln.” Nebraska U: A Collaborative History. http://unlhistory.unl.edu/exhibits/show/unl-aim/unl-aimLinks to an external site..

McClanahan, A.J. 1972. “AIMed Support.” The Daily Nebraskan, November 8, 1972. https://nebnewspapers.unl.edu/lccn/sn96080312/1972-11-08/ed-1/seq-9/#words=American+Indian+MovementLinks to an external site..

Wishart, David. 2011a. “OTOE-MISSOURIAS.” In Encyclopedia of the Great Plains. University of Nebraska-Lincoln. http://plainshumanities.unl.edu/encyclopedia/doc/egp.na.079Links to an external site..

———. 2011b. “PAWNEES.” In Encyclopedia of the Great Plains. University of Nebraska-Lincoln. http://plainshumanities.unl.edu/encyclopedia/doc/egp.na.082Links to an external site..


Copyright Bryan Christman, CC by 4.0